yo what's up I'm gonna ask a somewhat
extreme question here but it's for a an
exceedingly moderate reason guy named
vegan mojo another YouTube channel that
have showed it out here in the recent
past I've posted a link to him and so on
he took what I think is a useful but
extreme position in a recent video in
which he basically proposed look
veganism essentially and integrally is
not about your health because it's not
about you now as I say I think that's
the kind of extreme position but it's
logical and it's useful for testing the
limits of our own assumptions of our own
ideas now many people could respond to
this I haven't seen or heard any more
smart people saying what do you mean
veganism is not about me in 2016
the discourse around veganism has been
co-opted by health and weight loss now
you could say something similar happened
for many many years with kung fu you
know kung fu is supposed to be about
military preparedness the martial arts
think about the meaning of the word
martial arts and I've met people because
I've been involved with Asian Studies
Asian politics Asian history I've met
people who sincerely cared about martial
arts and a lot of them were kind of
disillusioned with they were upset about
the fact that that whole scene basically
got diluted by weight loss by martial
arts being being packaged for health and
fitness and weight loss and
what-have-you and catering to the ego
trips of the clientele which we
certainly do here in veganism we
certainly like to cater to tropes of a
collect so I don't know I was I was
intrigued to take this a step further
and ask is science itself actually
irrelevant to veganism is Beauty itself
irrelevant to veganism
because what the vegan mojo has
suggested which oversized sympathizer
the some extent he suggested the
possibility that veganism is essentially
about ethics and of course it is an
ethos that is global in its perspective
or cosmological in its perspective it's
ultimately a set of ethics that yes on
the one hand is built on animal
suffering but on the other hand is built
on ecology on taking responsibility for
outcomes on a global scale ie the
outcomes of animal agriculture animals
rotation etc well if so I mean that's
interesting both looking back in history
and looking forward as I am someone who
studied ancient history ancient
philosophy in Europe and in Asia see no
ancient Greece but also ancient China
ancient India ancient Sri Lanka
moderately ancient Cambodia Thailand etc
um you know I'm someone who has an
unusually long view of philosophy
politics human condition etc and of
course it is very interesting to note
the epoch of of pre scientific
philosophy all these ideas played out
but nobody could have any certainty
about what was nutritionally adequate
there were different schools of thought
that really tried to argue for
vegetarianism or for something close to
veganism it's never quite exactly our
modern idea of veganism that tried to
argue for that but of course none of
them could ever feel any certainty that
the diet they were proposing was
adequate for human health and now of
course in the other hand historically
there have been whole civilizations that
had profoundly false notions of
nutrition and where the vast majority of
people were an extremely bad health for
that reason chronically sometimes whole
social classes of people I remember one
of my professors began a lecture by
dramatically describing
the unbelievably horrible diseases that
the Japanese aristocracy suffered from
and how these resulted from totally
unscientific notions they had about
their diet and health and that meanwhile
the peasants in Japanese society did not
believe in these things and also did not
have the wealth to eat the this somewhat
absurd diet of the Japanese aristocrats
and therefore did not have these
unbelievably horrible diseases there
were diseases that relied on nutritional
deficiencies you know like scurvy you
can't get scurvy unless you first have a
deficiency etc in the same way
apparently medieval and ancient Japanese
society suffered from some diseases that
are that are completely absent in the
modern world
for this reason so that was sort of the
theater of ideas that veganism and
vegetarianism had to compete in on
purely ethical grounds for most of
history and of today in 2016 on the
contrary
we've had the accumulation of certain
anecdotes that are powerful but are
nevertheless anecdotes about human
health scientific discoveries that are
anecdotal in and of themselves that
vegans have some vegans have tried to
construct into a model really of human
evolution a model that claims human
beings were evolved to be vegan that
innately our optimal nutrition can only
be achieved through veganism now I don't
think that's really I don't think that's
scientifically valid and I don't think
that's going to be socially effective
I'll say a little bit more about why but
it's not my main theme in this video I
mentioned also there's an earlier video
here called my vegan story like the
story of how I became vegan when I got
involved this I was completely willing
to to become strictly vegetarian and
later vegan out completely assumed it
was worse for my health than eating meat
that was comfortable with that as
recently like as it back in the year
2000 the whole scene like the animal
rights vegetarian scene the word vegan
wasn't used my
back then it was not based on health at
all as I say there were other ideas like
of primitivism there were other ideas of
being more tough being more self-reliant
being more authentic you know back to
the land more you know getting away from
the decadence of what the 20th century
had become and you know I remember that
when I was a kid talking about visionary
look really really when I was a kid I
can remember because I'd seen the
statistics I remember saying to people
you know our own grandparents didn't eat
this much meat our own grandparents
didn't use this much electricity like
you know the things we assumed we need
just a short time ago were not perceived
as such necessities and that does not
mean my grandparents were angels I mean
my grandparents generation they smoked a
lot of cigarettes they played cards
they had different vices that different
ways of wasting their time but so many
measures of the decadence what was
considered normal in the world around me
when I was a child really the 1980s I
was aware those things had changed
recently they were not permanent and
immutable features of Western culture
they were they were all too mutable it
had become common for people to eat meat
three meals a day and that wasn't the
case five hundred years earlier but it
wasn't even really the case fifty years
earlier anyway many many things been
profoundly even though the frequency
with which people eat in restaurants
that's changed my grandmother they were
not dirt poor I remember my grandmother
telling me when she went on a date she
would bring the boyfriend she would
bring the young man she was trying to
date to eat dinner at her grandmother's
house I didn't they didn't go to
restaurants and you know they would eat
carp nobody get filter fish anyway these
were um it's also interesting my mother
actually likes to misrepresent that side
of the family as if as if they had
always been wealthy but from my
grandmother self I know
I know they weren't and I had enough
anecdotes about how they lived anyway
sorry this is uh this a digression I
think it's interesting and worth asking
are we getting caught up on something
that's actually irrelevant to the core
ecological and ethical claims of
veganism in trying to base veganism on
scientistic promises of better health or
not now on the other hand as history is
pressed in the last few decades because
I don't know it's not that deep we do
have some kind of smoking gun anecdotes
I'll use just one for the purposes of
this video if you look into cholesterol
it's shocking and scary zero dietary
cholesterol really is optimal not less
not little zero and basically if you
want to have zero dietary cholesterol
you have to be vegan you know obviously
you could still own leather or something
and the scariest part of that to me is
not the effects on the heart or the
circulation below the neck although
obviously those are very real and very
scary the scariest part is the effect of
cholesterol on the brain and I won't say
anything more but any of you guys can
google this and look into it
but the effects of cholesterol the same
way we talked about hardening the
arteries and it's very well-known you
know people say well you know the the
veins leading to your heart the arteries
around the heart are relatively large
the arteries are you know in some other
parts of the body are relatively fine
well the flow of blood in your brain it
relies on very very fine arteries and
veins and it is terrifying the effects
that a high cholesterol that I have on
the brain and I think means sadly once
you start looking into it
many of the forms of mental dysfunction
that are common in elderly people but
probably that are common in middle-aged
people and so on actually do reflect on
a man
civ social scale the effects of the high
cholesterol meat-based diet that's
become normalized necessary so i mean
that anecdote alone is powerful it has
power over me personally i would be
vegan anyway i would be vegan if it were
bad for my health because i think it's
the right thing to do but also in our
heart of hearts as vegans i think we we
have to be detached with the fact that
as science progresses there will be
anecdotes on the other side every so
often there's some scientific discovery
whether it's about i don't know some
species of fish or something you know
there's some animal product that turns
out to be healthy by some definition the
same way the newspapers get so excited
whenever there's a study saying that a
glass of wine is good for you the
newspapers promote the hell out of that
any excuse for people to indulge in
their bad habits and when I was a kid I
could remember there were these
scientific studies claiming that
chocolate was good for you
and you know yeah okay you know
chocolate has some nutrients I get it
but what this was manufactured into
socially it's not really the the science
it's the social reproduction of the
science oh it's painful oh I had a
girlfriend and what she told me about
her boss at work a woman who was
terribly overweight and who would buy a
box of chocolates every day and they
were the fancy like Valentine's Day
style chocolates you know we have a big
disposable box and the chocolates are
laid out and she would eat one whole box
of that every day and she would remark
to her employees including my girlfriend
that she did it as health food and she
would quote these factoids from the
newspapers about you know how chocolate
had some health benefits so I mean I
just say as vegans if we're
self-critical and we're honest I don't
know I mean those scientific anecdotes
can you really play to win that way
veganism itself has been
so far astray within the last few years
by fad diets by scientistic ideas by you
know anecdotes misunderstood
misrepresented and take it out of
context whether it's 30 bananas a day or
any other fad diet a lot of vegans have
lost patience with the fact that this
movement has been discredited by crazy
weight-loss ideas and fad ideas within
veganism and on the other hand we know
we don't have the exclusive rights to
this thing right on the other hand you
know the other side and multi-million
dollar industries that stand a profit
out of these things they'll always have
their little anecdotes here or there and
tit for tat they can sort of play the
game in the other way nevertheless and
look globally before I move on I don't
really believe that anyone becomes vegan
because they sat down and read the
peer-reviewed scientific literature
about those health effects maybe there
were one or two people who have
broadening it beyond a very I mean a
tiny number of people who do scientific
research that may be convinced to become
vegan by studying those types of health
effects anecdotally in isolation or in a
more systematic way for humility it's
yeah okay a tiny number of people but
more broadly when we're talking about
veganism as a movement ethical veganism
veganism to change society vegan doesn't
change the world the type of people who
will be moved by those anecdotes like
the one I've just shared about
cholesterol that I personally find scary
and by the way looking at history there
were a lot of a lot of political leaders
who had very serious forms of brain
malfunction that ultimately are indeed
caused by cholesterol in the diet
Woodrow Wilson was really the most
powerful man in the world at the end of
the first world war in American history
and in world history and Woodrow Wilson
had very very serious brain dysfunction
ultimately stemming from his diet
you know including seizures but seizures
are only the most obvious and visible
part alas I digress
who will be moved to change their lives
on the basis of those scientific
anecdotes I think it's only people who
are already looking for it
you know that's the the ultimate
weakness of that science and you know I
don't think you can assemble those
scientific anecdotes into a kind of
pseudo religion to then go around
converting people to veganism and I
respect it
that is what some people are trying to
do you know whether they use it in terms
of an evolutionary model or whether they
have some other model of trying to put
these anecdotes together into a greater
whole I actually see the real
significance of science as being at the
opposite extreme I think it's I think
the significance of science for the most
part it is irrelevant to the ethical
claims the ecological claims etc I
really mean nutritional science here so
like in terms of pollution there's also
science and measuring how much pollution
goes into the river and so on but at the
opposite extreme if you deal with people
who believe for example in consuming
eggs chicken eggs that are raised in
very very particular conditions that
they consider ethical so there are
people there almost always members of
religious movements but sometimes
they're just people whose grandmother
has pet chickens and there are people
who send you emails saying these
chickens live in these conditions under
these circumstances they're not
suffering by this person's definition by
some subjective definition they say they
have invented ethical eggs well the
ultimate reason why that's irrelevant
even though you know for individual
people they may have I mean again
whatever it is their grandmother
inherited a chicken coop
the chickens are themselves rescued and
they're laying eggs anyway another
the eggs go in the garbage you will I
mean as life goes on you will meet
people including vegans who actually are
in circumstances like that because
they've rescued hens or whatever and
they say okay look these are relatively
ethical eggs and otherwise they'll go in
the garbage so why not eat them anyway
those are the situations where you say
no because eggs are poison
you should never even eat one chicken
egg in your entire life in terms of the
science as it now stands so that to me
is interesting is that the science
ultimately makes certain ethical
questions irrelevant we don't need to
devise a more ethical chicken coop we
don't need to reform the egg industry we
need to abolish it because ultimately
eggs are just poison eggs do not have
any positive role to play in human
nutrition the transition we need to make
as a civilization is not from caged hens
to free-range hens the transition we
need to make is from being a
civilization where everything has eggs
in it to being a civilization that
doesn't depend on the egg industry in
any way whatsoever and when I say you
know that everything is eggs in it boy
if you're honest with yourself if you
really go and look traditionally how
many you know baked goods
you know mass manufactured foods all had
egg in them for no reason not when it
doesn't really add to the flavor or
nutritional but I mean the use of egg is
an ingredient all kinds of fluffy stuff
like meringues and what-have-you
it's insane but over centuries we
developed it we developed all these
perverse uses for egg whites to be used
in every imaginable type of food deserts
and main courses and what-have-you and
yeah ultimately all that needs to stop
and the reason for that ultimately I
think is scientific that the whole
question there are all the ethical
questions but at a certain point the f
the ethical questions become banal
precisely because there is no
nutritional justification and on the
other hand it's just poison so that is
interesting to me
under that heading people likewise asked
about so-called ahimsa dari if you want
to sound like you studied sanskrit
university you can say i hing say dari
by the way um you know cows that are
raised in captivity sometimes by Hindu
religious fundamentalists cows that are
raised in conditions that again
some people consider ethical I don't on
this channel I've made it very clear by
man see domestication period so to me it
doesn't matter how comfortable the
chicken coop is it doesn't matter how
comfortable the dairy is I regard it all
as perverse and wrong because I even
regard raising a dog as a household pet
it's wrong I don't think dogs should
decorate carpets I think dogs should
live as close to their natural habitat
as possible and you know they should be
able to engage in their hunting
behaviors their mating behaviors and you
know likewise I I don't think there's
any moral form of domestication of
animals and domesticating cows to
exploit them for their milk I think is
always going to be perverse and messed
up even though there are these dairies
that so they're a tiny tiny minority but
probably for Hindu religious reasons
maybe for some other reason are
producing a tiny fraction of the world's
milk by ethical standards
now that would be a very different
question if scientifically we had
learned that milk really was something
positive or wonderful for human
nutrition
if nutritionally we had learned that it
was essential for some people like what
if what if there was some health
condition where people needed milk to
live there is there is no such health
condition but hypothetical question so
there - I mean again I think it's
interesting that the role of science is
not employed in providing the motivation
for veganism it's not in providing the
the validation for veganism it's
actually in providing a limit to the
ethical discourse where it's like look
we all agree factory farming is immoral
and terrible we may agree that
vivisection is immoral and terrible we
agree that you know all kinds of things
are immoral and terrible but then when
you get down
to the opposite extreme of how shall we
say the humanitarian ization of egg and
dairy production when you get down to
that extreme there are different
questions but as vegans we don't have to
ask or answer those questions because of
the science to me
that is interesting